You and General Dean stayed with the plane.
Actually, it's funny to talk about these things.
And it's interesting, I think. It's fascinating.
This is common, ordinary things that happen in a
relation between nations. That's the reason to me
that they're so meaningful looking back now. And
in this particular case, I got to talk and live and
eat and get drunk with almost. I was still a fine
ambassador. I couldn't get drunk, but I had a lot of
vodka that evening with the commander of a Red Air
Force fighter squadron. No telling how many guys,
Germans, this guy had to his credit. And through
the interpreter sitting right between us, the
interpreter for the ambassador, this Navy
lieutenant. And by the way, he had time for his
life, too. He didn't have flies, so he could drink.
But he would interpret. And we talked like an Air
Force man to another Air Force man. There was no
problem whatsoever. So they took you into town.
Yeah, took us into town and put us up in a dormitory
that was fortunately still standing. Part of it
had been blown to pieces. Every place was almost
just cleared to the ground, razed to the ground,
demolished. How about the people? Very few people
I saw. I don't know where they were. I guess they
were living in the ground. Even they had the P-39s
around the field on alert. They had them backed off
into sort of a dugout ramp, like you would have put a
tank. Sure. They'd roll them down to at least get
them with the wall levees around them, you know. A
gun emplacement-like thing is what they had them
parked in. And they still expected German attacks
from them. Sure. They worried about us being
there. There might be a German attack on us. And
rightfully concerned about the Ambassador to the
United States. But I had conversations with the
squad. They gave us a deal. So that evening, all of
you went, everybody on the plane went to dinner.
Yeah. General Dean ended up finally took him over
to where the Ambassador was staying. I don't know
where it was. But my crew and me and the
Ambassador's interpreter were somehow or
another, he stayed with us. And through him, and
actually I was talking with this
Red Air Force pilot, fighter pilot. And typical,
typical American fighter pilot. Typical. You
mean he was like an American? Except for his
language and his uniform, I would have thought I
was talking to another American fighter pilot. No
kidding. And even, you know, after two drinks, oh,
he says, when we take care of the Germans, he said,
don't worry, don't worry, we're going to take care
of the Japanese. No problem. Don't worry. When we
get to the Germans, and they kaput soon, and then
that kaput Japan. What about, did you swap some
stories about the flying tigers? Oh, yeah. Had he
heard of the flying tigers? Yes, since you brought
it up, I think he had heard about this. He had no
respect for Japanese whatsoever. He thought it
would be simple. No respect. It must have been easy
over there, something like that, you know. But he
and I just got along great. And I gave him my Zippo
cigarette lighter and I think he gave me a little
tiny ivory bone, I guess, type cigarette lighter.
It didn't even work. We changed that as gifts to one
another. Was he a colonel?
No. I don't remember what his rank was. He couldn't
have been over a major rank. But he was a squadron
commander. And very young, very young, but a lot of
combat experience, no doubt. And cocky, typical,
typical fighter pilot. A tiger, if you will. And
the next morning, of course then we went to bed, the
next morning we got up, and for breakfast we had raw
fish and vodka. Raw fish and vodka. And you had to
chew on it a little to be courteous because the
Russians, you know that old fighter pilot sat
right next to me, just gobbling it up, and toasting
me in vodka. You know, I had to, I felt free to tell
him, look, I've got to fly the airplane, but I'll
sip it with you.
And most cordial, most cordial. No problem
whatsoever, you know. Then you think back to the
problem we're having in Russia now, compared to
our discussion there with a Red Air Force fighter
pilot.
But that's the story. Isn't that incredible? Let
me, the airplane picks the problem. But did you,
because of this conversation with this fighter
pilot, did you have different, did you come to
different thoughts about the average Russian?
No, as a matter of fact, it's been firm. I can't talk
about the man on the street, on the lower strata of
people, when you sit down and talk, communicate.
Many times, in subsequent meetings with the Red
Air Force who was supporting us at the shuttle
bases, you know, staying there overnight on many
meetings with them and talking to them. It was this
same type of camaraderie, no problem whatsoever.
Just very close feelings. To me, I felt closer to
them than I would if I'd talked to a ramp pilot or air
pilot. No kidding? Oh, yeah. Just like a
typical... Matter of fact, I liked them. And
utmost confidence. I was sure that guy could take
on any German fighter pilot and whip him any day.
That's how I felt about it. So you had a high regard
then for the military man in the Russian Air Force.
Like I say, it would be a terrible, terrible
conflict.
But, you know, those boys are gone now. They're
like me. They're 16, 17, retired. Many of them are
dead. Russia hasn't been fighting a war like we
have, so I don't know how combat experience they
have, how much they have in their current forces. I
see evidence of it in pictures, but how much of it is
propaganda? Did you leave the next morning then?
Yeah, took off the next morning and went on down to
Cairo. And the airplane was? No problem. Had a very
good crew. I forget what problem, was it an oil
valve or something? Where'd you get the part?
Didn't need a part. Cleaning or something? Or a
leak. One came loose, and I'm getting one of those.
Now, tell me about some other field visits that you
made. Well,
most of the other visits were down at the shuttle
bases. I go down there frequently. Piraeacan,
Poltava, and- Poltava? Poltava. In Romania?
Poltava and the Ukraine area. Okay, in the
Ukraine. Yeah. The three of them. Two of them were
bomber recovery bases and one was a fighter
recovery base and it was just wide open field area
where steel planking for runways were laid down by
Red Army women. A force of Red Army women. And many
of the support forces that they moved into the
bases to take care of, you can tell they were
typical Red Army uniform. Always that huge
ankle-length overcoat. Just to see it every
place. Every one of them. The girl, the man, the
kid, all of them wore that same. Air Force guy, the
Army guy, the Navy guy, they always wore that long
overcoat.
The, what were the fields? The field for the We had a
permanent force of Americans at three bases and it
took months. That was a problem. We were trying to
get adequate force to run the bases in order to take
care of the reception of the aircraft and where to
park them and take care of them. And I think we were
holding out for, oh, initially around 2,000,
2,500, something like that. We ended up with
1,200. Russians always said, no, we'll take care
of it. We'll take care of it. We'll take care of
that. So you had about 1,200 men at each one of
these. 1,200 Americans. And each one of them had to
have visas. That's another thing that held us up.
Each one of them had to have visas. Generally
stating. The difficulty we had in laying on these
bases and laying on for military operations, we
continually came face to face with the Red Army,
with the communist bureaucracy of keeping
foreigners out of the nation. Sure. Keep it at an
absolute minimum. If the ones that are permitted,
they must be documented and have visas and
research and so forth and so on. And it took time,
just interminable delays. Everything we did took
delays. Very, very frustrating. But being
determined, we did it. And I don't know how many
Russians they had to support and supply and feed
us, but they had enough. And they did the job. The
bases were hit. And we lost a lot of B-17s over there
one night. And this, they, part of the agreement
was, they would provide the air defense. They
would not permit us to have any air defense forces
there at all. No fighters. No fighters at all. Only
bombers. As a matter of fact, our fighters, the
bombers, would not be permitted to take off in an
air defense role. This was all understood before
we even laid on any of the missions. But before we
get to the attack, to go back to the support was
adequate. But the time it took to do things is what
was so frustrating. Tents were arranged and put up
for the crew. The crew slept in tents. And they'd
just stay long enough to rearm, refuel, and then
take off on another mission and go back, really,
about an overnight stay, weather familiar.
Generally, that's the way the missions were run.
And they had, you know, open mess with mess kits and
all. They had to bring the mess kits. And they went
so far at first to demand that the crew members on a
flight must have visas before they made a shuttle
mission. Well, eventually, up to ambassadorial
level, and maybe even stalling above Molotov, I
don't know, but we got that eliminated. That was
just, you know, impossible. Plus, it made...
jeopardize the mission by giving away some of the
secrecy. Well, at times you almost came to the
conclusion that they were purposely putting
these obstacles in your path to discourage us from
doing it. Looking back now, I don't think they
really, matter of fact, I know they didn't want to
do this because it exposed their country and their
situation more to foreigners, a la the Berlin
Wall. They just wanted us out. They didn't want
foreigners in.
So tell me about the conditions of these three
bases. They were livable. The steel plank, of
course, we had experience operating on them. We
knew that there was no problem operating on those.
On the steel planks? Yeah. Landing and take-offs.
The parking, as long as it wasn't in In bad weather,
if it rained, we'd have to cancel the mission
because these airplanes, particularly loaded
B-17s, couldn't taxi that mud, black mud of the
Ukraine. Crimea, not Crimea, but the Ukraine
area. No concrete, of course. But we had enough
maintenance people locally just for turnaround,
and 1,200 people we had, including— That's 1,200
at each base. Totally. They had about 400 men at
each base. Right, and a certain amount of that was
staff to maintain relations with General
Perminoff, who was a Russian general in charge. He
supported the three bases. They had a little
organization, and we had a little organization. I
think they came out of the 8th Air Force.
The food was adequate. Mostly flown in by the
bombers? Mostly the food was flown in by the
bombers? No, no. Matter of fact, we flew supplies
in around through Tehran and up from Tehran in
transport aircraft. One of the biggest problems
was the belly tanks that we had to ferry in on each
mission, or at least have ready at the base.
I think it was about 30 or 40 of them, see, recovered
in one base. And they'd dropped their tanks, see,
on the flight across. They'd used up their fuel,
and the only way to get back was to have more fuel
tanks, belly tanks. So we had to ferry those in. And
here they'd stop the transport at Tehran and say
they had to wait to get visas for the crew. Well,
that, of course, that actually caused several
missions to be scrubbed. Many times, the protocol
demands of the bureaucracy of Moscow caused us to
struggle out of bombing missions. As time went on,
we worked out some of these problems where things
got a little more routine, and it worked a little
bit more smoothly. Towards the end, it was working
fairly well. But just with this containing
persistence, did we ever get anything done.
But eventually, it got done. So the food was
adequate, and the men slumped in tents. And they'd
come in off a mission over Germany, land in the
Ukraine, stay there overnight, refuel, and
rearm, and hit Germany on the way back to France.
Yeah, on the way back, primarily Germany. And
then, of course, 15th Air Force Midley began to
make missions up. fly across and hit maybe Romania
or Germany or some place, then recover and fly
back. It was effective, and of course it made for
closer coordination, supposedly, between
Russia and us in the eventual pizza movement
against Germany. But looking back now, I'm not too
sure how effective it was because there was one
colonel assigned to our mission in Moscow who was
to coordinate targeting for the Red Air Force. And
this was to always know exactly where the front
lines of the Russians were so when we planned a
target we didn't want to overrun. And they were
advancing very rapidly and taking the big cities
back. So we had to maintain close liaison with
them. But this colonel who had that job initially
met with a Red Air Force colonel in the Kremlin and
met him and discussed what they were supposed to
do. That's the only time he ever saw him. He
remained over there for six months, never had
another meeting, and got to the point where he
said, boy, he almost became an alcoholic. They
just sent him back. That was the amount of
coordination between the forces for
Pinsonville. So you never did bomb then? There was
never an occasion. So you only bombed from the
American side and you never bombed for the Red Army
advancing? See, that's one of the things we wanted
to do. We wanted to coordinate with the advances
and make bomb targets really in effect, if you
will, tactical support in advance of the oncoming
Red Army. They never did work out that way. The
Russians didn't want us to do it because they
figured we'd destroy places and they wanted to
take them intact and they didn't want want to
destroy it. They didn't want to do it. So
basically, they didn't want to work with us on it.
They just worked with us on the surface. Follow
General Book, General Dean Book, The Strange
Alliance. Right. Now, what about, now there's
been the issue of American air flyers and crews
that went down right on or around behind the
Russian lines. And after the war, the We were
wondering if they had held any of those people, and
I've read some of the dispatches from Harriman
back to Roosevelt in which he says that the
Russians weren't very forthcoming about getting
our pilots back to the embassy and then we could fly
them out again. Do you remember anything like
that? I remember the Pacific Cape you're talking
about. The Pacific Cape you're talking about, to a
B-29 crew in a Japanese war, an attack against
Japan where a B-29 had to recover in Russia, north
of Vladivostok area, because of maintenance
problems, or maybe damage. But some way or
another, and this was sort of the early periods of
this type of coordination relation with Russia.
They held the crew, and some way or another, they
just wouldn't cooperate with the ambassador in
transferring them to Moscow, where if the
ambassador didn't want to talk to them, they'd get
them on home. For some reason or another, they just
wouldn't do it, and it took the ambassador a long
time, and personally, I think personally,
Probably, Roosevelt eventually probably sent
out a personal water stallion. I have an idea he
must have. But eventually it broke loose, and all
of a sudden it just broke loose, and no problem
whatsoever. It was exactly the reverse. They
couldn't do enough for us to cooperate, to get the
crew back and all. Just outstanding, you know. But
that's the only occasion I remember at first.
After that, I guess after the decision was made,
passed down to the chain, and there was no fear of
superiors Maybe a Russian was doing something
wrong, and the stage was set, and orders were
given, and that thing worked all right after that.
Now, the few Russians, the few Americans that were
shot down behind a Russian mine were in the
European theater of operation. Normally, there
was a few occasions of that happening, and there
was no particular problem getting those politics
back. They were helpful. Yeah. Cooperative
helpful.
I say cooperative and helpful. In the way you and I
look at it, you might say, well, reluctantly they
did it, or with delaying tactics they did it.
Just never, never been able to understand why
this, except that maybe superstition and fear of
doing something wrong from above. Discipline is
a, discipline in Russia is a, in my opinion, a
terrible thing. A mistake made in Russia, to me,
must be a terrible thing. In time of war, I'm sure
many of them were shot.
On this flight I was telling you about, where I was a
navigator back from out of the cockpit, it was
after the Tehran conference. The ambassador
wanted to get back to Moscow very fast. The weather
was terrible, horrible. Snow stormed all the way
up. And he couldn't fly above them? Yeah. Well, to
fly above them, that's what I tried to do, but there
was no nav agent in Moscow at that time, except for
me trying to monitor a commercial radio station,
maybe with my radio compass, and then there's
still no letdown procedure. And whether there it
goes clear, it goes around, zero, zero. But at any
rate, I took off and said, we can try it. Well, I
wanted to. I wanted to impress Molotov. Who sent
out that message? impressed Molotov and says, do
you think we can do it? And I said, well, we can try, I
think we can. I remember General Dean was worried.
Why did he want to impress Molotov? Well, see, one
of our objectives was to build up the Air Transport
Command routes. They showed that weather was no
problem. We could get through, you know, with an
airplane. Molotov went back by rail. And I took off
and started back. And by the way, we had the British
Ambassador aboard, too, in that flight. And I got
Norris. Did you really? Yeah. take him back. It was
after the Tehran conference, going back to
Moscow. What was his name, Lord? He was a tall
Scottish man. Well, Clark Carr was later, but this
was not Clark Carr, this was a man before him. And I
met him, by the way, and loved him. Love Clark Carr?
Oh, that's true. But anyway, we took off and I got a
little north of Donningrath.
one of my checkpoints. And it was beginning to get
over the overcast and I didn't want to do it. So I
turned around, went back down to where the
overcast ran out, let down and then came back and
was going to fly under it all the way to Moscow.
And it kept getting lower and lower and lower and
finally I was, you know, over 500 feet above the
ground. Fortunately, it was snowing, and as a
result of continual snowing, not real dense snow,
I could see forward visibility of maybe a couple of
miles. But as a result of the snowing, the
precipitation didn't fog up or anything, so I
could see well enough. It was that way all the way up
to Moscow. But I got lost. The navigator had no idea
where I was, and I looked over at him, Russian
navigator, and boy, his beads were swept around me
as far as he was scared to death. And finally I
looked over at my copilot and I said, get walked up
there, my navigator. So I told him. First I had to
get the interpreter up and tell him to get this
Russian navigator back. Boy, he didn't want to go,
but I said, back? First time I ever talked in a
command directly to him, back. And we got back and
got my navigator out there and we took him back. He
says, we'll just find a double railroad. There's a
double railroad here someplace. We find that. We
know that leads to Moscow. And I found it. And got
right down on top of that railroad, flying about
1,500 feet above it. No kidding? With my head stuck
out in a bubble on the side of my airplane, flying it
manually all the way to Moscow. And as we came into
Moscow— Of course, you knew the terrain. There
weren't any mountains. Oh, no, it's flat. Wasn't
anything. No mountains or no—it
was sort of prairie land all the way down. And not
even any rolling hills, just flat. And you know, as
long as it stayed above that railroad, there
couldn't be anything higher than the railroad
poles, telephone poles. And finally hit— the city
of Moscow and flew right square over the top of the,
I buzzed the Kremlin. I guess it's the only time
it's ever been buzzed. I couldn't have been over 50
feet above it. And spied the airport and came in and
landed. And I was, I admit, I was worried. Here I had
the ambassador on board, daughter of General
Dean, a British ambassador. And I must admit, I was
real worried. I had visions of going down, you
know, The responsibility was terrible. What a
relief when I landed there. First guy that got off
was this British, well of course he got off as the
ambassador, but he may have gotten in his car and I
understand he stayed in bed about a week. He was
scared. No. He just got sick. And the ambassador of
course he felt equally as I. I remember sending a
message back to the ambassador telling him, we may
have to land at Raman Skoy. That was a big air base
just south of Moscow. And his, which is typical of
him, he's back to the interpreter. Tell me exactly
why you think we will have to land at Raman Skoy. He
didn't pray. He said, tell me exactly why. And he
told me, well, I'm not sure that I'll be able to fly
over the city at low altitude and find Central
Airport. But I will try to get it in Central
Airport, where, you know, we're supposed to land,
normally land. So he didn't question me anymore.
But he was equally glad when we landed, I could
tell. As a matter of fact, he came up and personally
complimented me and said, you know, something
like, I appreciate this. And I said, I'll tell Mr.
Molotov. The next day, he had a meeting with Mr.
Molotov. Mr. Molotov had heard. about me ordering
this navigator in the back of the airplane. He told
the ambassador all about this. He had heard that.
Now, that's how it got to him. And expressed
concern that we would take such a chance. And the
ambassador told me, I just, he said, well, I just
told him, well, it's typical flights of humor. We
knew we'd make it. And of course, the ambassador,
when he was telling me this, he was kind of grinning
about it, too. He knew it was, but he, he, He had made
a point, you know, with the ambassador. And he was
quite proud of it. And he thought I was great, even
greater than before. But incidentally, I never
saw that navigator again. No kidding. They
replaced him on the airplane. End of that story.
Well, that's fascinating.
Did you know Sir Clark, not Clark, Sir Frank
Roberts, who was the assistant to Clark Kerr? in
the British Embassy.
He was Kennan's counterpart in the British
Embassy. I'm sure I must have met him, but I don't
know him, but I don't remember his name. Okay. Were
there any other field visits, or have we covered
all of those?
Yeah, I think we have. That's all I've got to take. I
almost got a chance to take a trip along the
Transylvania Railroad to Vladivostok, but
instead of me they sent an army colonel. I think it
took him ten days to make that trip.
Now let's talk about the conferences. that you
went to, the wartime conferences. You went to the
Tehran conference and the Cairo conference. Yes.
When I say I went to the conference, I flew the
ambassador down. I didn't actually participate
at that level. No, I know. But I flew him down, the
Tehran conference. You can imagine the time it
took in arrangements that would take to make
arrangements like that, and the secrecy of it. I
didn't even know at that time I'd say until about 24
hours before takeoff of what was going on. I just
figured I was taking the ambassador on a trip to
Iran. And I never did feel free to query the
ambassador about anything about why I was going on
this trip. So I didn't know why. That's how secret
it was. I'm sure if Moscow proper only In our group,
I guess, Harriman and General Dean knew about the
planning. Probably counting until? Until 24, I'm
sure. And of course, took him down with General
Dean. General Dean attended with him. I remember
the ambassador, it
may have been General Dean who told me this, but I
remember this comment. It sort of compares the
three big leaders to you. Churchill, Darlene, and
Roosevelt. At the opening of the conference, I
believe it was Ambassador Herman telling General
Dean about this, or then General Dean telling me,
or maybe it was Ambassador Herman who told me about
this. He said, Mr. Roosevelt stood up and made a
very good opening speech, you know, very
impressive as usual and all. It took five or six
minutes. Then Mr. Churchill got up, and as usual,
kicking English around. He did terrific. He made a
wonderful speech and all, and sat down. And
Staline got up and said to his interpreter,
gentlemen, let's get to work, and sat down.
Staline, I met him and shook hands with him. Tell me
about that. When we presented our credentials
initially, you know, when I first arrived in
Moscow, when the ambassador presented his
credentials, I went with him. I actually shook
hands with Stalin, a little sharp guy, very
impressive. And obviously to me, you know, here I
am meeting Stalin. Tell me about that. Well, I was
impressed with the man. He was sharp and another
human being. When I look back now, but in the
Kremlin, me, Charlie Baum, taking hands with Mr.
Starling, I'll never forget it. And of course, I
was impressed. I was impressed with the
surroundings, just the occasion, and just
overall. That's the closest that I ever got to him.
I did see him a couple of times at the Bolshoi
Theater on a special performance when Churchill
visited. Incidentally, he hated Churchill's
guts and vice versa. And Harriman and Roosevelt
knew it. Roosevelt had to be sort of a temporal or
the arbitrating type of a guy between them. They
despised each other. Tell me about the Kremlin and
Stalin's office. I was never in Stalin's office.
We were in the reception room where Stalin came
into.
It's a typical government bureaucratic
building, if you will. If I remember correctly,
the walls, sort of a fortress wall around the
entire Kremlin. The Kremlin is a group of
buildings. Oh, yeah. Well, you've seen it. The
inside of it is the grounds of manicure in the
summertime. Of course, everything covers snow in
the wintertime. But if I remember correctly, the
buildings were cream plastered. And not bleak
like right outside the walls of the Kremlin, like
the city was. Bleak and dreary and unmaintained.
Inside of it was immaculate. The inside of the
buildings were, comparatively speaking, to our
big office buildings and government buildings,
very bare. Pictures on a wall, maybe of Lenin and
Stalin.
very, the furniture was just the plainest stuff in
the world, even in the main conference room.
Always the green velvet cover for the conference
table. Felt, felt covered, green felt, like a pool
table. That's the typical Russian conference
table, with bottles of water, purified water, and
vodka and goblets on the table, Russian
cigarettes about, arranged for conferences,
neatly, neat and clean inside. No flies in there,
like in Winningfield. Not primitive in nature
there. In other words, the best of Russia, but yet
plain. No RNA. Austere is the word. Austere.
Marble floors, that type of thing. And, of course,
guards and sentries every place. And when you
arrived at the Kremlin, how long did Stalin keep
you and Mr. Harriman waiting? Was Dean with you?
Yes. You three? Well, there may have been others,
but I remember specifically Mr. Harriman,
General Dean, And since I was the ambassador's
aide, I was along. Now, also, the supply general
may have been along, the Lindley supply general. I
forget his name. Again, it would be in that book,
The Stranger Lines. But he was there. And I think
the reason
Mr. Herman's approach, and we actually talked
about this at times, it was very evident. He took
all of us along. Normally, let's say, you know,
maybe strictly diplomatically speaking, maybe
just he personally, without even an interpreter,
should have gone. But here, you know, I think he was
trying to break the wall down between Russia and us
from a standpoint of communication and try to get
things on an informal basis and Look, in effect,
look, I've got a lot of people here, and I want them
to talk. They've got to talk to your people, and
let's talk. This is always his objective. And for
some reason or another, it didn't take. He
generally got the audience of Molotov any time he
asked for it. And many times, by the way, it's
strange, I'd hear General Dean talk about this,
and it always turned out to be even some of the minor
conferences between some of the other liaison
intelligence people and communications people.
They'd have the conference at maybe 2 o'clock in
the morning. Yeah, I know that.
Stone and Molotov were night people. They were
night people. Night people? Oh, yeah. Matter of
fact, the hierarchy. at night people. And I dare
say this may still be true. Definitely during the
war it was. And when you went, let's get back to when
you presented your credentials. When you went,
you gentlemen went to the Kremlin. You went to the
reception room. How long did you wait before
Stalin came out? And then can you describe the
situation and give me your impressions?
How do we call this waiting too long? We did wait.
Then he came in the opposite end of the room and made
me walk across with an interpreter right next to
him, an ambassador, a hairman. How was he dressed?
I think he was dressed in tunic, military type
uniform, army type uniform. The white one? No, no.
The greenish gray and the slacks and the tunic
buttons all the way at the top. He rode the Soviet
Union, you know, that gold medal hanging from a, I
mean the gold star hanging from a little red rivet.
One of those, a mustache. So he didn't have, he
didn't have- I had epaulettes on, but I don't even
remember what was on the top of the
epaulettes. Yeah, he had epaulettes on. I don't
remember the insignia on the top. Well, you know, a
lot of the time he was referred to as Marshall
Stalin. Oh, yeah, I know. OK, so he walked in, and
you all stood up? He walked in, made you walk across
to shake hands with the ambassador. And
obviously, I forget exactly what he said, but the
interpreter then would tell Mr. Ambassador and
airmen in English, you know, delighted to have
you, and all of that type of stuff. And then right
down the line, immediately, you know, going right
down to me. I don't even say anything. He shook
hands with me, and in effect, I don't even He may
have looked at me, but I don't even remember him
looking me straight in the eye. I looked him
straight in the eye. I was impressed with the, you
know, awed, if you will. I was awed down at him. Oh,
yeah. He was shorter than I. How did he look up
close?
He looked heavy, a little, not fat, but stocky.
Stocky is the word. Did he look tired or energetic?
No, he looked tired. He definitely was not a
sunburned man. No. He definitely was white.
Closely shaven except for his mustache.
Immaculate.
Short hair. Gray.
No glasses. I don't think we ever sat down. It was a
short meeting, and that's what you do with those,
you put out the credentials. And I think there were
some actual papers that Harriman gave to one of his
people with him. It eventually turned out two more
people came in behind him. I forget who they were. A
tennis, I guess, tape of papers, that type of
thing. And after, it was only a few minutes, more
than at the most. I think we did have a vodka. I think
we did have a vodka. Well, in eight or ten minutes,
we were leaving.
And at that type of meeting, it's very short. No, of
course, no business done. No. And we bid him
goodbye, and I think we turned around and left him
rather than him leaving us. In other words, he saw
us through the door.
conference room. Oh, 20 by 20 feet. One big table in
the middle. And then you went back to the
automobile, and what were the comments of your
colleagues?
I don't remember any particular comments except
that all of us seemed to be impressed. I think it was
more of thoughtful soul-searching and silence
rather than discussion If I remember correctly. I
don't remember anybody saying anything to me. I
don't recall.
I know the ambassador subsequently saw Charlene a
lot of times. He was representing the President of
the United States. He wasn't representing the
Secretary of State. OK, so let's switch then from
your meeting in Stalin to that conference that you
went to, your first conference.
We were talking about the Cairo, right? Oh, the
Tehran conference. Oh, yeah, all right. We were
talking about the Tehran conference, and you said
you flew them down there. Then we flew back, you
know. But while you were there, what did you do? Did
you just wait for them? Well, I just waited a day. I
think we stayed there about a week. And at one time I
told you the story already of trying to, is this on
your recording? Yeah, you've already told the
story where you attempted to get up. To the guards,
yeah. Yeah, okay. Then, well, that's just about
all that. Did you have any opportunity to see any of
these leaders? I never. You never got to see
Roosevelt? No, never saw any dignitaries at all.
Never got to see Churchill? No. I subsequently
saw, several months later, on one of Churchill's
visits, The Moscow. The Moscow. And
incidentally, Churchill flew straight across
Europe over Germany at night in his airplane to
visit him. He didn't fly around the combat area.
And I saw Churchill at the Bolshoi Theater with
Staline, or Swan Lake, by the way. And he stood up
to, you know, standing applause from the crowd.
And Staline walked back, actually walked out of
the Lodz area so that Churchill could take the
honors. And he was dressed in his old
parachute-type suit. That's the only time I've
seen Churchill. Again, a very impressive person.
Very impressive person. Did they give him a
standing ovation?
Oh, yeah. Then, of course, the Cairo Conference.
It was later on. I think that must have been in
October of 44. No, it was later than that. No, no,
no, no. October of 44 when Churchill visited. He
did visit for about 10 days in October of 1944.
Well, he made, actually Stein made, I think, I
mean, Churchill made at least two visits while I
was over there. Yeah. Besides the Turin and Cairo,
but the Moscow proper, I think he visited at least
twice. Okay, okay. Now, What about the other
conference? The Cairo conference, it's the same
type of affair, except there,
except there of course, we discussed the Japanese
situation, and Chenault was there at that
conference, and I got a chance to visit Chenault.
But there again, I just flew them down, and they
attended, and I waited, and it was about the same
duration, but during the time I was waiting, of
course, the generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek was in
Chicago, and Chennault was with him, so I got to
visit with Chennault one evening after dinner,
and I think I stayed there maybe a couple of hours,
just talking about old times, discussing, of
course, his situation. What did he have to say?
I don't recall exactly. There was nothing
outstanding it makes me recall other than the fact
that he's sorry that I didn't get back to serve with
him. And he wished I had. And I told him I wished I
had. And I recounted for his experience what
Arnold said. And he said, you'd be surprised. I
heard that about 24 hours after it happened. And he
got quite a kick out of that. And apparently by
then, you know, the earlier distaste and
hostility between Arnold and Chenault had faded
because now, you know, Chenault was a major
general commanding the 14th Air Force and the
chain of command. And of course Arnold was his
boss, so apparently they were getting along all
right. He really looks typical, same as usual. No
change whatsoever. As long as I've ever known him,
Of course, I'd seen him over a period of about five
years. He never changed his look. He always looked
the same. He, of course, had his problems with
supply. And he was always on the bottom of the
priority list, forgetting anything. And he told
me of those troubles. We talked in generalities.
Was it a satisfying meeting? Oh, yeah. Except that
I was glad to see him again. He asked me a lot of
certain questions about the Russians. You see, he
had had relations with Russian people, including
some of the pilots in China earlier. They
delivered Chinese aircraft, so he knew a little
bit about it, which surprised me. I don't recall, I
think his, he had a little bit
So you flew back from the Cairo conference and you
didn't have any problem as far as... No, we didn't
have any. No more problem like that. And did the
Ambassador ever make any statements to you on the
way back about anything that was discussed? Oh,
no.